1;2802;0c
In addition, when you are ready to resubmit, please be prepared to
provide the following:
(1) A detailed list of your responses to the review comments and the
changes you have made in the manuscript. We require a file of this
nature before your manuscript is passed back to the editors.
(2) A copy of your manuscript with the changes highlighted (encouraged).
We encourage authors, if possible to show clearly where changes have
been made to their manuscript e.g. by highlighting text.
(3) PLOS offers a figure-checking tool, PACE
(http://pace.apexcovantage.com/), to help authors to ensure all figures
meet PLOS requirements so that the quality of published figures is as
high as possible. Please use this tool to help you format your figures.
PACE is a digital diagnostic and conversion tool for figure files. It
will provide information about any failed check(s) and, if able, will
automatically convert the figure file into an acceptable file that
passes quality checks. PACE requires you to register for an account to
ensure your figure files are processed securely.
(4) A striking still image to accompany your article (optional). If the
image is judged to be suitable by the editors, it may be featured on our
website and might be chosen as the issue image for that month. These
square, high-quality images should be accompanied by a short caption.
Please note as well that there should be no copyright restrictions on
the use of the image, so that it can be published under the Open-Access
license and be subject only to appropriate attribution.

Before you resubmit your manuscript, please consult our Submission
Checklist to ensure your manuscript is formatted correctly for PLOS
Computational Biology:
http://www.ploscompbiol.org/static/checklist.action. Some key points to
remember are:

- Figures uploaded separately as TIFF or EPS files (if you wish, your
figures may remain in your main manuscript file in addition).
- Supporting Information uploaded as separate files, titled Dataset,
Figure, Table, Text, Protocol, Audio, or Video.
- Funding information in the 'Financial Disclosure' box in the online
system.

We are sorry that we cannot be more positive about your manuscript at
this stage, but if you have any concerns or questions, please do not
hesitate to contact us.

Sincerely,

Roland R Regoes
Associate Editor
PLOS Computational Biology

Sebastian Bonhoeffer
Deputy Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Computational Biology

A link appears below if there are any accompanying review attachments.
If you believe any reviews to be missing, please contact
ploscompbiol@plos.org immediately:



Reviewer's Responses to Questions

*Comments to the Authors:
Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.*

Reviewer #1: This paper focuses on a question that has dominated the
study of the evolution of infectious diseases for decades - how does
disease virulence evolve over time? This question has received lots of
theoretical study, but in general experimental evidence has been
difficult to come by. A few years ago Shireff et al conducted a model
study to address this question for HIV. They used set-point viral load
as a proxy for virulence, and used empirically measured relationships
between set-point viral load and transmissibility, and between set-point
viral load and time to progression to AIDS (e.g. length of infection),
in a multi-strain epidemic model that also encoded the heritability of
viral set-point between transmissions, to estimate the evolutionary
trajectory of set-point viral load over time.

Here Park and Bolker focus on a critical epidemic process that was left
out of the Shireff et al model. Shireff et al intentionally simplified
the contact process (partnership formation and dissolution) into a
random mixing model. Here Park and Bolker consider a suite of more
realistic partnership models based on some empirically-motivated models
from other papers. These models consider both long-term monogamous
relationships and extra-couple relationships formed by single or
partnered individuals. They find that considering the same
evolutionary-epidemic dynamics as Shireff, and calibrating each of these
models to reproduce the early epidemic prevalence data and other
quantities, these alternate contact models lead to very different
trajectories and optimums for virulence. They rightly conclude that it
is very difficult to make any predictions about the evolution of
virulence without knowing the contact dynamics in great detail.

Overall I think this is an important and well-done paper, which can
inform the study of many other diseases beyond HIV, and would highly
recommend it for publication.

I just have a few comments:

The abstract really needs to be improved. It’s missing the main points
of the paper (that different contact patterns change the predicted
trajectories and optimums of virulence), and has unnecessary minor
details (like the fact that parameters were sampled using a Latin
hypercube).

The introduction is really lacking a cogent description of the study of
the evolution of virulence, and the motivation of the paper would be
totally unclear to someone not already very familiar with this field.
The main points that are needed to spell out this issue are:

- evolutionary theory suggests that the disease strain that can lead to
the most secondary infections over the course of an index cases
infectious period will be selected
- the number of secondary infections can be increased by increasing the
transmission rate of the disease per unit time, or, by increasing the
amount of time an individual is infected.
- Evolution should select for disease strains that result in the highest
transmission rates and in the longest infectious periods (or longest
lifespans of infected individuals), if these traits can vary
independently. In that case, diseases should evolve to become less
virulent (cause less mortality to infected hosts)
- In many biological scenarios it’s reasonable to think these traits are
not independent. Pathogen load within an individual may lead to more
transmission (more pathogens being expelled from the body), but may also
lead to more pathogenesis and therefore more virulence. In that case,
there is a trade-off between increasing transmissibility and increasing
infectious period, and virulence may be selected to decrease, but may
increase, or reach an intermediate optimum.
- In the case of HIV infection, higher viral loads lead to a higher
chance of transmission per sexual act, but also lead to a faster
progression to AIDS (and therefore death, so a shorter infectious
period). Therefore, we expect there to be a trade-off. Previous
empirical work has measured this trade-off and suggested what the value
of the optimal viral load, and hence the optimal virulence (time to
AIDS), should be.

The paper claims to add considerations of population structure to the
study of virulence but only focuses on the rules of partnership
formation, while assuming all individuals have identical behavior
patterns, and not on another major aspect of population structure, which
is the heterogeneity in the number of partners (or rates of partnership
change) among individuals. In the case of a static network, this would
be considered the degree heterogeneity. Many studies have shown that
sexual contact networks tend to me more on the scale-free spectrum, and
so the assumption of uniformity of behavior seems weak. This study would
be most impactful if on top of examining these switch patterns it
examined the influence of contact heterogeneity.

In Figure 3 it would be helpful to also include time to progression to
AIDS as a figure panel

Reviewer #2: Modeling studies have shown that HIV could evolve towards
immediate virulence where the trade-off between host survival and
transmission is optimized. The aim of this study is to investigate how
different assumptions about sexual partnership dynamics affect the
transient evolution of HIV virulence in a population. While this is a
clear objective, the study is rather technical and, in my opinion, does
not provide major insights or conclusions. My major concerns regarding
the approach of the study is given below. Furthermore, there are several
issues in terms of structure and the model description that should be
considered by the authors.

Approach:
The authors argue that they compare more “realistic” models (based on
ref. 14) to the relatively simple model by Shireff et al. (ref. 10). In
my view, all these models are quite simplistic in that they do not take
into account age-structure and heterogeneity in sexual behavior.
Essentially, all these models are random mixing models where every
individual can make contact with every other individual. The only
difference to the random mixing model by Shireff et al. is that
transmission can occur in ongoing partnerships and that some models
allow for concurrency. Arguably much more important aspects that affect
HIV epidemics and virulence evolution are the above-mentioned age- and
risk-structure. Furthermore, the authors use a single-stage disease
model and do not distinguish between differences in transmissibility
between the acute (primary) and chronic (asymptomatic) stage of
infections, which might influence HIV virulence evolution more than
differences in the sexual partnership dynamics. Hence, I am not
convinced that the authors use a “more realistic” model than the one by
vShireff et al.

Structure:
- The references to the equations are not always correct.
- Figure 1 is described in Materials and Methods before the model is
fully explained. Consequently, the parameter r cannot be understood.
- Tables and Figures often lack dimensions, i.e., is is unclear what the
axes represent. Table 1 is more or less useless without providing
dimensions for the various parameters.
- The author summary seems to provide more information about the results
than the abstract. However, the authors use SPVL and progression to AIDS
as two different proxies for virulence which can be confusing.

Model:
The authors make use of a previously published model from ref. 14. This
model is based on the pair-formation formalism initially developed by
Dietz & Hadeler (1988, J Math Biol, PMID: 3351391) and later used by
Kretzschmar et al. (1994 & 1998, Math Biosci, PMID: 7833594 & 9597826).
I feel that the authors should refer to some of these original
publications as well. Unfortunately, the description of the models in
appendix S1 seems to be partially erroneous or incorrect. For example,
the primes for the derivatives are often missing (e.g., equation 22, 24
and 25) or it is unclear whether equations represent state variables or
derivates thereof. Also, the reasoning behind the “instswitch” models is
unclear to me. The authors say that “Once individuals leave a
partnership, they enter temporary compartments…”. The variables (or
derivatives?) X and Y_i in equation 19 consist of positive terms only,
so how do individuals leave these compartments? In my understanding the
standard pair model (equation 9) can easily account for instantaneous
partnership formation by simply setting the pair formation rate rho to a
high value.
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Reviewers who wish to reveal their identities to the authors and other
reviewers should include their name here (optional). These names will
not be published with the manuscript, should it be accepted.*

Reviewer #1: (No Response)

Reviewer #2: (No Response)



